Q1. What are the main categories of electors in India?
Ans.- There are 3 categories of electors in India: –(i) General electors (ii) Oversees (NRI) electors , and (iii) Service Electors.

Q2. What is the relevant date for determining the age of 18 years? Can I get myself registered as a voter on the day when I have completed 18 years of age?
Ans. According to Section 14 (b) of the Representation of People Act, 1950 the relevant date (qualifying date) for determining the age of an applicant is the first day of January of the year in which the electoral roll after revision is finally published. For example, if you have completed or are completing 18 years of age on any date from and after 2nd January 2013 but upto to 1st January 2014, you will be eligible for registration as a voter in the elector roll going to be finally published in January, 2014

Q3. Can a non-citizen of India become a voter in the electoral rolls in India?
Ans. No. A person who is not a citizen of India is not eligible for registration as a voter in the electoral rolls in India. Even those who have ceased to be citizens of India on acquiring the citizenship of another country are not eligible to be enrolled in the electoral rolls in India.

Q4. Can a non-resident Indian settled in foreign land become an elector of electoral roll in India?
Ans. Yes. According to the provisions of Sec 20A of the Representation of People Act, 1950 by the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2010, a person who is a citizen of India and who has not acquired the citizenship of any other country and is otherwise eligible to be registered as a voter and who is absenting from his place of ordinary residence in India owing to his employment, education or otherwise is eligible to be registered as a voter in the constituency in which his place of residence in India as mentioned in his passport is located.(For more information, please refer to ‘Frequently Asked Questions – Overseas Electors’)

Q5. I am a student staying at the place of study in a hostel / mess far from my native place. I want to get myself registered at my present address of residence. What should I do ?
Ans. In case of a student residing at the place of study, in hostel or mess managed by the educational institutions or elsewhere will have the option to get himself / herself registered as elector at his / her native place with his / her parents or at the address of hostel / mess where he / she is resident for the time being for pursuing his / her studies. The course pursued by the said students should be recognized by Central / State Governments / Boards / Universities / Deemed Universities and such courses should be of not less than 1 year’s duration. Such student who wants to enroll himself / herself at the hostel / mess will have to attach a bonafide certificate (as per the specimen at Annexure II of Guidelines attached to Form 6 available on the website of Election Commission) from the Headmaster / Principal / Director / Registrar / Dean of his/her educational institution with Form 6.

Q6. Where can the list of claims and objections be seen?
Ans. It can be seen on the website of the Chief Electoral Officer of the State concerned. It also can be seen on the notice board at the office of the Electoral Registration Officer.

Q7.. How will an applicant know that his/her name is included in the electoral roll?
Ans.- The decision of the Electoral Registration Officer will be communicated to the applicant by post on his address given by him in Form 6 and also by SMS on the mobile number given by him in Form 6. Electoral rolls are also available on the website of the Chief Electoral Officer of the State concerned and can be seen by anybody.

Q8. How can corrections be made if there are some mistakes in the entries in the electoral roll pertaining to electors?
Ans. For correction of mistakes in electoral rolls, an application in Form 8 is to be submitted to the Electoral Registration Officer concerned.

Q9. I have shifted from my residence where I am registered an elector to some other place. How do I ensure that I am enrolled in my new place of residence?
Ans. In case the new residence is in the same constituency, please fill Form 8A, otherwise fill up Form 6 and submit to the Electoral Registration Officer / Assistant Electoral Registration Officer of the area of your new residence.

Q10. I have shifted my residence recently. I have Electors Photo Identity Card (EPIC) with the old address. Can I get new EPIC for the present address?
Ans. First of all, you have to ensure that you are enrolled in the electoral roll of the concerned Assembly Constituency in which your new address is located. Though, it is not necessary to get your new address changed in EPIC, however, if you want to change address in EPIC, that can be done by making an application with a charge of Rs. 25 to Electoral Registration Officer of the new constituency. The Electoral Registration Officer will issue an EPIC with new address though the number of EPIC will be the same as that of the old EPIC.

Q11. My EPIC has some errors. What is the procedure to have a new EPIC with correct particulars?
Ans. You can make an application in Form 8 for rectification of the errors in your EPIC. The Electoral Registration Officer will issue a new EPIC, with the same number, after making the necessary corrections.

Q12. I have lost my old EPIC. How can I get a new EPIC ?
Ans. A replacement EPIC can be issued to an elector on the receipt of Form-8 for the purpose, alongwith a copy of FIR/Police Report.

Q13. Who can object to the inclusion of names in electoral rolls?
Ans. Any person who is a voter in the concerned constituency may object to the inclusion of names in electoral roll on the ground that the person whose names is included or is proposed to be included is not eligible to be registered as a voter in that constituency. An objection can be made in Form 7 to the concerned Electoral Registration Officer along with the relevant proof.

Q14. My neighbour / relative has shifted his residence to a new place but his name still continues in the electoral roll. In which Form the application for deletion of his name from the electoral roll can be made?
Ans.- For deletion of name of a shifted / dead / absentee elector from the electoral roll application can be made in Form 7. For deletion of a duplicate entry also, application should be made in Form 7.

Q.15 When can one get registered in electoral roll. Is enrollment is on throughout the year.
Ans. The Election Commission normally orders revision of existing electoral roll every year sometime in the months of September to October and such revised rolls are finally published in first week of January of the coming year. One can submit claim application (Form 6) during period for lodging claims and objections to Electoral Registration Officer or an officer designated to receive such applications, i.e., Designated Officer. Even after final publication, the rolls are updated continuously and one can get registered anytime during the continuous updation by filing a claim application to Electoral Registration Officer / Assistant Electoral Registration Officer.

Q.16 Can one be enrolled at more than one place?
Ans. No. A person cannot be enrolled as a voter at more than one place in view of the provisions contained in Sections 17 and 18 of Representation of People Act, 1950. Likewise, no person can be enrolled as an elector more than once in any electoral roll. Any person while applying for fresh enrolment, makes a statement or declaration whether his / her name is already included in the electoral roll of any other constituency, and if such statement/declaration is false and which the applicant either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he is liable to be punished under section 31 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950.

Q.17 If I have a complaint against the order of Electoral Registration Officer, to whom I should make an appeal?
Ans. During the period of revision, you can file an appeal to the District Election Officer. In the case of application during the process of continuous updation, such appeal against any order of Electoral Registration Officer will lie before the District Magistrate/ Additional DM / Executive Magistrate / District Collector of the District concerned. A further appeal against the order of Appellate Authority will lie before the Chief Electoral Officer of the State.

Q.18 What is the condition for getting registered in electoral roll?
Ans. Applicant should be i. An Indian citizen, ii. of 18 years or more of age with reference to qualifying dates, iii. ordinary resident of the area concerned

Q.19 When will the ERO process the advance claims received with respect to the subsequent qualifying dates of the year?
Ans. Such advance claims received during Annual Summary Revision and also after final publication shall be disposed of by the EROs in the concerned subsequent quarters only under continuous updation, in the first month of subsequent quarter

Q.20 What is the relevant date for revision of electoral roll after the Election Laws (Amendment) Act, 2021 came into existence?
Ans. The Annual Summary Revision is conducted with reference to 01st January of the year only, in which the roll is finally published, as qualifying date. During a non election year, no regular revision activities would be there for the subsequent qualifying dates of the year. However, during a year when general election to State Assembly of House of People is due, a second Summary Revision may be conducted w.r.t. the qualifying date proximate to the said general election. However, there would be no restriction on filing of advance application with reference to the subsequent qualifying dates of summary revision in a year and such advance applications will be disposed of under continuous updation.

Q.21 How can one get registered/enrolled in the electoral roll?
Ans. One has to file the application for the purpose, in prescribed Form 6(6A in case of overseas Indian), before the Electoral Registration Officer (ERO)/Assistant Electoral Registration Officer (AERO) of the constituency within which the place of ordinary residence of the applicant falls. The application accompanied by copies of the relevant documents can be filed in person before the concerned ERO/AERO or sent by post or can be handed over to the Booth Level Officer of polling area concerned, or can be filed online through NVSP portal/VHA mobile application or on website of Chief Electoral Officer of the concerned state/ECI. While filing Form 6 on line, the copies of necessary documents should also be uploaded.

Q.22 From where registration forms can be obtained?
Ans. Forms can be downloaded from the website of Election Commission of India. Formsare also available free of cost in offices of Electoral Registration Officers / Assistant Electoral Registration Officers and Booth Level Officers of the concerned polling station areas.

Q.23 Is it mandatory to provide the Aadhaar details of the applicant in the field provided in the Forms for registration?
Ans. No it is a purely voluntary field and non-submission of Aadhaar details shall not be a ground for the rejection of the application by the Electoral Registration Officer. It is expected from the applicant to furnish the Aadhaar details voluntarily for the sake of purification of electoral roll.

Q.24 I am a student staying at the place of study in a hostel / mess far from my native place. I want to get myself registered at my present address of residence. What should I do?
Ans.- In case of a student residing at the place of study, in hostel or mess managed by the educational institutions or elsewhere will have the option to get himself / herself registered as elector at his / her native place with his / her parents or at the address ofhostel / mess where he / she is resident for the time being for pursuing his / herstudies. The course pursued by the said students should be recognized by Central / State Governments / Boards / Universities / Deemed Universities and such courses should be of not less than 1 year’s duration. Such student who wants to enrol himself / herself at the hostel / mess will have to attach a bonafide certificate (as per the specimen at Annexure II of Guidelines attached to Form 6 available on the website of Election Commission) from the Headmaster / Principal / Director / Registrar / Dean of his/her educational institution with Form 6

Q.25 A homeless person, who is otherwise eligible for registration as an elector, does not possess documentary proof of ordinary residence. What is the procedure of verification in such case?
Ans. In case of homeless persons, the Booth Level Officer will visit the address given in Form 6 at night to ascertain that the homeless person actually sleeps at the place which is given as his address in Form 6. If the Booth Level Officer is able to verify that the homeless person actually sleeps at that place, no documentary proof of place of residence shall be necessary. Booth Level Officer must visit for more than one night for such verification. After conducting such verification and to the satisfaction of ERO that the person fulfills all the prescribed conditions, necessary action for enrolment shall be done

Q.26 I am a tenant and my landlord does not want me to get enrolled. How can I get enrolled as a voter? Who is competent authority to verify claim applications and objections?
Ans.- To get enrolled in the voter list is your statutory right. Please check the electoral roll of your area available on website of Election Commission / Chief Electoral Officer of the state / in office of Electoral Registration Officer / Assistant Electoral Registration Officer. If your name is not included in the roll, please fill up Form 6 and submit it to the ERO/ AERO/ Booth Level Officer

Q.27 Where the postal address of the Electoral Registration Officers can be obtained from?
Ans.- Postal addresses of all Electoral Registration Officers are available on the website of Election Commission of India / Chief Electoral Officers of respective State / Union Territory (link to which has been provided on the Election Commission of India website)

Q.28 If I apply on line, whether I need to send physical signed copy of the form with documents to the Electoral Registration Officer’s address?
Ans.- As soon as the ERO/AERO receives Form 6 filed on line, the same would be downloaded and BLO would be deputed to visit your residence for verification.

Q.29 Who is an overseas (NRI) elector? Can an NRI settled in foreign land become anelector of electoral roll in India?
Ans.- An overseas elector is a person who is a citizen of India and who has not acquired citizenship of any other country and is otherwise eligible to be registered as a voter andwho is absenting from his place of ordinary residence in India owing to his employment, education or otherwise is eligible to be registered as a voter in theconstituency in which his place of residence in India as mentioned in his passport is located. According to the provisions of Section 20A of the Representation of the People Act, 1950, an NRI settled in foreign land can become an elector in electoral roll in India.

Q.30 How can an overseas Indian (NRI) get registered / enrolled in the electoral roll?
Ans.- He/she has to file an application for the purpose in prescribed Form 6A before the Electoral Registration Officer / Assistant Electoral Registration Officer of the constituency within which the place of ordinary residence of the applicant in India asgiven in his/her passport falls. The application accompanied by duly self-attested copy of the relevant documents can be filed in person before the concerned ERO/AERO or sent by post addressed to him or can be filed online through NVSP portal/VHA mobile app or on the website of Chief Electoral Officer of the concerned stat/ECI.

Q.31 What documents are required to be enclosed with Form 6A?
Ans.- One recent passport size coloured photograph, duly affixed in Form 6A, photo- copies of the relevant pages of the passport containing photograph, his address in India and all other particulars of the applicant and also the page of passport containing the validvisa endorsement.

Q.32 Where the entries pertaining to overseas (NRI) elector find place in the electoral roll?
Ans.- Name of overseas elector is included in a separate section for “Overseas Electors” which is the last section of the roll of that particular part / polling station area of the constituency in which his place of residence in India as mentioned in his passport is located.

Q.33 Whether Electoral Registration Officer is to be informed of the change in current residential address of the overseas (NRI) electors in the country of his/her residence?
Ans.- Yes. It is the responsibility of the overseas elector to keep the Electoral Registration Officer informed of the change in residential address in the country of his/her residence

Q.34 Whether Electoral Registration Officer is to be informed when the overseas (NRI) elector returns to India and becomes ordinarily resident in India?
Ans.- Yes. An overseas elector must do so. In such a case, the person can then be registered as a general elector at the place where he is ordinarily resident in India.

Q.35 How can an overseas (NRI) elector whose name is enrolled in the electoral roll exercise his/her franchise?
Ans.- After enrolment, an overseas (NRI) elector becomes able to cast his/her vote in an election in the Constituency, in person, at the polling station provided for the part where he/she is registered as an overseas (NRI) elector.

Q.36 Is an overseas (NRI) elector issued an EPIC?
Ans. – An overseas (NRI) elector is not issued an EPIC as he is allowed to cast his vote in an election in the constituency, in person at the polling station on production of his original passport.

Q.37 Whether the overseas (NRI) elector should surrender EPIC, if already issued to him, in India?
Ans. Yes.The overseas elector should surrender EPIC, if already issued to him, in India, alongwith submission of Form 6 A.

Q.38 Who is a service voter?
Ans. Service voter is a voter having service qualification. According to the provisions of sub-section (8) of Section 20 of Representation of the People Act, 1950, service qualificationmeans –(a) Being a member of the armed Forces of the Union; or(b) Being a member of a force to which provisions of the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), have been made applicable whether with or without modification;(c) Being a member of an Armed Police Force of a State, and serving outside that state; or(d) Being a person who is employed under the Government of India, in a post outside India

Q.39 What are the application Forms in which various categories of service voters have to apply for enrollment as elector?
Ans. Following are the application Forms in which various categories of service voters are to make application for enrollment as service voter: -1. Members of Armed Forces – Form 22. Members of Armed Police Force of a State, serving outside that State – Form 2 A3. Persons employed under Government of India on post outside India – Form 3However, if a service personnel has opted to get himself enrolled as general elector at place of his posting, where he is actually residing, he will have to apply in Form 6 like other general electors

Q.40 What is the process of enrollment of any service personnel as a service voter?
Ans. Election Commission normallyorders revision/updation of rolls for service voters every year. The Commission sends a communication to Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of External Affairs intimating them of the commencement of revision programme. As soon as the programme is announced, persons having service qualification can fill up the application in statutory Form 2 / 2A / 3, and handover to the officer in-charge of record office or the nodal authority in Ministry of External Affairs (in case of persons employed under Government of India on a post outside India). All the activities of summary revision including submission of Forms by eligible service personnel through their Record Officer/Commanding Officer are done online through service voters portal exclusively meant for service personnel. The person applying in Form 2 / 2A has also to submit a declaration to the effect that he did not get enrolled as general elector in any constituency which is the part of the Form itself. The officer in-charge, after verification of the Form forwards the same to the Electoral Registration Officer concerned to process the Form and to take necessary action for enrolment.

Q.41 Is spouse (wife or husband) or son/daughter of a service voter also enrolled as a service voter?
Ans. The spouse of a service voter shall, if he/she is ordinarily residing with his/her spouse, can also be registered as service voter in the constituency specified by that person. The service voter has to make a statement to the effect in the relevant Form 2/2A/3 that his/herwife/husband ordinarily resides with him/her. The wife/husband will be enrolled as a service voter on the basis of declaration made by her husband/his wife in the application form itself submitted by him/her and no separate declaration / application is required to be made by the wife/husband. A son/daughter/relative/servant etc. residing ordinarily with a service voter cannot be enrolled as service voter

Q.42 Can one be enrolled simultaneously as a service voter at his native place as well as a general voter at the place of posting?
Ans. No. A person, at a particular time, cannot be enrolled as a voter at more than one place in view of the provisions contained under Sections 17 and 18 of Representation of People Act, 1950. Likewise, no person can be enrolled as an elector more than once in any electoral roll. As explained above, a service voter has option either to get himself registered as service voter at his native place or as general elector at the place of posting. When a person applies for registration as a service voter in Form 2 / 2A, he has to submit a declaration in a prescribed format to the effect that he did not get enrolled as ordinary general elector in any constituency.

Q.43 Who is a Classified Service Voter?
Ans. Service voter belonging to Armed Forces or forces to which provisions of Army Act, 1950 are applicable, has option of either voting through postal ballot or through a proxy voter duly appointed by him. A service voter who opts for voting through a proxy is called Classified Service Voter (CSV).

Q.44 Who is a ‘proxy’? What is the procedure of appointment of a ‘proxy’?
Ans. A service voter may appoint (by applying to Returning Officer in Form 13 F of Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961 – Form available at the website of Election Commission) any person as his / her proxy to give vote on his / her behalf and in his / her name at the polling station. The proxy shall have to be ordinary resident of that constituency. He need not be a registered voter but he / she must not be disqualified to be registered as a voter.A ‘proxy’ can be appointed in the following two ways: -• If a service voter is at the place of his posting, he has to put his signature in Form 13F before the Commanding Officer of the Unit and then to send the Form to his proxy for affixing his / her signature before a Notary / First Class Magistrate. Thereafter, the proxy can submit the Form to the Returning Officer concerned.• If a service voter is at his native place, both he and his proxy can sign Form 13 F before a Notary / First Class Magistrate and then send to the Returning Officerconcerned.

Q.45 Can a Classified Service Voter be issued postal ballots by the Returning Officer?
Ans. A Classified Service Voter cannot be issued postal ballots but the appointed proxy shall physically come and vote at the polling station which covers the classified voter’s home address.

Q.46 For what period a proxy remains valid?
Ans.- The provision for voting through proxy is valid till the person making the appointment is a service voter. Once appointed, the proxy will continue until his appointment is revoked by the service voter. The facility of proxy voter can be revoked and the proxy can be changed at any time or for any number of times by the Classified Service Voter. Thus a Classified Service Voter can revoke and opt back for postal ballot route or even substitute the proxy by intimating the Returning Officer in Form 13 G of Conduct of Elections Rules, 1961 (Form available at the website of Election Commission). Revocation will become effective from the date it is received by the Returning Officer.

Q.47 When should the application for appointment of a proxy be made?
Ans.- Application for appointment of a proxy should be received by the Returning Officer before the last date of filing of nomination papers. An application for appointment of a proxy received after the last date of filing nomination papers cannot be considered for the election in progress, though it will be valid for subsequent elections unless revoked / changed

Q.48 In which language the last part of rolls is prepared for service voters?
Ans. The last part containing the list of service voter is prepared in English only

Q.49 Is a service voter issued Elector Photo Identity Card (EPIC) like ordinary electors?
Ans. A service voter is not issued Elector Photo Identity Card (EPIC). Elector Photo Identity Card (EPIC) is a document of identity which an elector has to show at the polling station at the time of casting his vote. As service voters are issued postal ballots or votes through his ‘proxy’, they are not required to visit the polling stations personally and therefore Elector Photo Identity Cards (EPICs) is not issued to them.

Q.50 Is a service voter required to apply for issue of a postal ballot paper?
Ans. No; the Returning Officer will himself send a postal ballot paper to him through his record office (or direct or through the Ministry of External Affairs in the case of a service voter serving outside India).

Q.51 What is the relevant date for revision of electoral rolls for Legislative Council Constituencies?
Ans.- In the case of Local Authorities Constituencies there is no qualifying date, however the qualifying date for being enrolled in Graduates and Teachers Constituencies 1st day of November of the year in which the preparation or revision of the electoral rolls is commenced.

Q.52 How can one get registered/enrolled in the electoral rolls for Legislative Constituencies?
Ans.- For enrolment in electoral roll for Local Authorities Constituencies only ex-officio and nominated members of the Local Authorities in the concerned State are eligible. The application for inclusion can be made in Form 17 to the Electoral Registration Officer. For registration in Graduates and Teachers Constituencies, one has to file the application for the purpose, in prescribed Form 18 or 19 as the case may be, before the ERO/AERO of the constituency within which the place of ordinary residence of the applicant falls. The application accompanied by copies of the relevant documents can be filed in person before the concerned ERO/AERO or sent by post addressed to him.

Q.53 From where Form 17/18/19 can be obtained?
Ans.- It can be downloaded from the website of Election Commission of India. Forms are also available free of cost in offices of Electoral Registration Officers / Assistant Electoral Registration Officers.

Q.54 What are the conditions for enrolment in Graduates and Teachers Constituencies?
Ans.- For enrolment in a Graduates’ Constituency one should be an ordinarily resident in that Constituency, and should have, for at least three years before the qualifying date (1st November of the year), been either a Graduate of a university in India or in possession of any of the qualification deemed to be equivalent to that of a Graduate of a university in India. For registration in electoral roll for a Teachers’Constituency, one should be ordinarily resident in that Constituency and within the six years immediately before the qualifying date (1st November of the year), for a total period of at least three years, should have been engaged in teaching in any of the educational institutions notified by the State Government within the State, not lower than in standard than that of a secondary school

Q.55 What documents are required to be enclosed with Form 18?
Ans.- The eligible person should apply for enrolment of their names in the prescribed Form 18 along with any of the documents listed below-(i) The degree/diploma certificate, in original, issued by the University or Institution concerned or a copy thereof, duly authenticated by the Designated Officer/Additional Designated Officer/Gazetted Officer of the District concerned. (ii) A copy of an entry in the Government record or a certificate issued to a Graduate employee by the Gazetted Head of Offices/Institutes on the basis of entries in Government records in his custody or a copy of an entry in the record of Statutory Bodies, Corporations or Public undertakings specifying the degree, diploma or certificate possessed by the claimant, duly at tested by the Head of the office concerned; or (iii) An attested copy of the card of registration as Registered Graduate issued by the University, a certified copy of the relevant entry in the list of Registered Graduates’, the Roll of Advocates, the Register of Medical Practitioners, the Register of Chartered Accountants, the Register of Engineers maintained by Institute of Engineers, etc.;or(iv) An Affidavit by the claimant, supported by certificate from the Registrar of a University, or the Principal of a College affiliated to university or from the Head of the Department of such College under whom he had studied; or(v) The mark sheet, in original, issued by the University or Institution concerned or a copy there of, duly authenticated by the Additional Designated Officer/Gazetted Officer of the District concerned/Notary Public

Q.56 What documents are required to be enclosed with Form 19?
Ans.- Every person applying for enrolment (in Form-19) in Teachers’ constituency must submitdocumentary proof of having been engaged in teaching in anyof the specified educational institutions for a total period of at least three years within six years immediately before the qualifying date. Electoral Registration Officer / Assistant Electoral Registration Officer concerned should make such verification of the documentary proof as he considers necessary. A certificate by the Head of the teaching institution should normally be considered adequate documentary proof of possessing that teaching qualification. If any person, who has applied for inclusion of his name in a teachers’ constituency, has been engaged in teaching in more than on specified educational institutions in the last six years, the certificate from the Head of institution of each of such educational institution will be required for the period for which he was engaged in teaching in that educational institution.

Q1. What is the Model Code of Conduct?
Ans. The Model Code of Conduct for guidance of political parties and candidates is a set of norms which has been evolved with the consensus of political parties who have consented to abide by the principles embodied in the said code and also binds them to respect and observe it in its letter and spirit.

Q2. What is the role of Election Commission in the matter?
Ans. The Election Commission ensures its observance by political party(ies) in power, including ruling parties at the Centre and in the States and contesting candidates in the discharge of its constitutional duties for conducting the free, fair and peaceful elections to the Parliament and the State Legislatures under Article 324 of the Constitution of India. It is also ensured that official machinery for the electoral purposes is not misused. Further, it is also ensured that electoral offences, malpractices and corrupt practices such as impersonation, bribing and inducement of voters, threat and intimidation to the voters are prevented by all means. In case of violation, appropriate measures are taken.

Q3. From which date the Model Code of Conduct is enforced and operational upto which date?
Ans. The Model Code of Conduct is enforced from the date of announcement of election schedule by the Election Commission and is operational till the process of elections are completed.

Q4. What is applicability of code during general elections and bye-elections?
Ans. During general elections to House of People (Lok Sabha), the code is applicable throughout the country. During general elections to the Legislative Assembly (Vidhan Sabha), the code is applicable in the entire State. During bye-elections, in case the constituency is comprised in State Capital/Metropolitan Cities/Municipal Corporations, then the code would be applicable in the area of concerned Constituency only. In all other cases the MCC would be enforced in the entire district(s) covering the Constituency going for bye-election(s).

Q.5. What are the salient features of the Model Code of Conduct?
Ans. The salient features of the Model Code of Conduct lay down how political parties, contesting candidates and party(s) in power should conduct themselves during the process of elections i.e. on their general conduct during electioneering, holding meetings and processions, poll day activities and functioning of the party in power etc.

Q6. Whether a Minister can combine his official visit with electioneering work?
Ans. No The Ministers shall not combine their official visit with electioneering work and shall not also make use of official machinery or personnel during the electioneering work however, the Commission has exempted the Prime Minister from the operation of the model code of conduct provision pertaining to the combining of official visit with electioneering visit.

Q7. Whether Govt. transport can be used for electioneering work?
Ans. No transport including official air-crafts, vehicles etc. shall be used for furtherance of the interest of any party or a candidate.

Q8. Whether Govt. can make transfers and postings of officials who are related to election work?
Ans. There shall be a total ban on the transfer and posting of all officers/officials directly or indirectly connected with the conduct of the election. If any transfer or posting of an officer is considered necessary, prior approval of the Commission shall be obtained.

Q9. Suppose an officer related to election work has been transferred by the Govt. before enforcement of model code of conduct and has not taken over charge at new place. Can such officer take over charge of office at new place after announcement of the code?
Ans. No. Status-quo-ante shall be maintained.

Q10. Whether a Minister of Union or State can summon any election related officer of the constituency or the State for any official discussion during the period of elections?
Ans. No Minister, whether of Union or State, can summon any election related officer of the constituency or the State for any official discussions anywhere. Only exception will be when a Minister, in his capacity as in charge of the department concerned, or a Chief Minister undertakes an official visit to a constituency, in connection with failure of law and order or a natural calamity or any such emergency which requires personal presence of such Ministers/Chief Ministers for the specific purpose of supervising review/salvage/relief and such like purpose. If Union Minister is traveling out of Delhi on purely official business, which cannot be avoided in public interest, then a letter certifying to this effect should be sent from the concerned Secretary of the Ministry/Department to the Chief Secretary of the concerned State, with a copy to the Election Commission.

Q11. Can an official meet the minister on his private visit to the Constituency where elections are being held?
Ans. No. Any official who meets the Minister on his private visit to the constituency shall be guilty of misconduct under the relevant service rules; and if he happens to be an official mentioned in Section 129 (1) of the Representation of People Act, 1951, he shall also be additionally considered to have violated the statutory provisions of that Section and liable to penal action provided thereunder.

Q12. Whether Ministers are entitled for official vehicle during the election?
Ans. Ministers are entitled to use their official vehicles only for commuting from their official residence to their office for official work provided that such commuting is not combined with any electioneering or any political activity.

Q13. Whether Ministers or any other political functionaries can use pilot car with beacon lights affixed with siren?
Ans. Minister or any other political functionary is not allowed during election period, to use pilot car or car with beacon lights of any colour or car affixed with sirens of any kind whether on private or official visit, even if the State administration has granted him a security cover requiring presence of armed guards to accompany him on such visit. This prohibition is applicable whether the vehicle is government owned or private owned.

Q14. Suppose a vehicle has been provided to Minister by the State and the Minister is given an allowance for maintenance of such vehicle. Can it be used by the Minister for election purposes?
Ans. Where a vehicle is provided by the State or the Minister is given an allowance for maintenance of the vehicle, he cannot use such vehicle for election.

Q.15. Whether there is any restriction or visits of members of National Commission for Schedule Castes or any other similar National/State Commissions?
Ans. It is advised that all official visits of Members of such Commissions shall be deferred, unless any such visit becomes unavoidable in an emergent situation, till the completion of election exercise to avoid any misunderstanding that may arise in any quarters.

Q16. Whether a Chief Minister/Minister/Speaker can attend a “State Day” function of a State?
Ans. There is no objection provided that he does not make any political speech on the occasion and the function is to be conducted only by Govt. officials. No advertisement depicting the photograph of Chief Minister/Minister/Speaker shall be released.

Q17. Whether Governor/Chief Minister/Ministers can participate and address the Convocation function of University or Institute?
Ans. Governor may participate and address the Convocation. Chief Minister or Ministers may be advised not to participate and address the Convocation.

Q18. Whether “Iftar Party” or any other similar party can be hosted at the residence of political functionaries, the expenses of which will be borne by State exchequer?
Ans. No. However any individual is free by to host any such party in his personal capacity and at his personal expense.

Q19. Is there any restriction on issue of advertisement at the cost of public exchequer regarding achievements with a view to furthering the prospects of the party in power?
Ans. Yes. The advertisement regarding achievements of the party at the cost of public exchequer in the print and electronic media and the misuse of official mass media during the period of election is prohibited

Q.20. Whether hoardings/advertisements etc. depicting the achievements of the party(s) in power at Centre/State Governments at the cost of public exchequer can be continued?
Ans. No. All such hoardings, advertisements etc. on display shall be removed forthwith by the concerned authorities. Further, no advertisements should be issued in the newspapers and other media including electronic media at the cost of public exchequer.

Q21. Whether a Minister or any other authority can sanction grants/ payments out of discretionary funds?
Ans. No. Ministers and other authorities shall not sanction grants/payments out of discretionary funds from the time elections are announced.

Q22. Suppose work order has been issued in respect of a scheme or a programme. Can it be started after announcement of election programme?
Ans. Work shall not be started in respect of which work order has been issued before announcement of election but the work has actually not started in the field. If a work has actually started in the field that can be continued.

Q23. Whether fresh release of funds under MPs/MLAs/MLCs Local Area Development Fund of any scheme can be made?
Ans. No. Fresh release of funds under MPs/MLAs/MLCs Local Area Development Fund of any scheme shall not be made in any area where election is in progress, till the completion of the election process.

Q 1. There are 543 Parliamentary constituencies in India each electing one member. Who demarcates the boundaries of these constituencies?
Ans. Delimitation Commission Under Article 82 of the Constitution, the Parliament by law enacts a Delimitation Act after every census. After coming into force commencement of the Act, the Central Government constitutes a Delimitation Commission. This Delimitation Commission demarcates the boundaries of the Parliamentary Constituencies as per provisions of the Delimitation Act. The present delimitation of constituencies has been done on the basis of 2001 census figures under the provisions of Delimitation Act, 2002. Notwithstanding the above, the Constitution of India was specifically amended in 2002 not to have delimitation of constituencies till the first census after 2026. Thus, the present Constituencies carved out on the basis of 2001 census shall continue to be in operation till the first census after 2026..

Q 2. What is the main basis for allocation of seats to various States in the Lok Sabha?
Ans. Population of the State Population is the basis of allocation of seats of the Lok Sabha. As far as possible, every State gets representation in the Lok Sabha in proportion to its population as per census figures.

Q 3. Is there any reservation of seats for any special category in Lok Sabha?
Ans. Yes In Lok Sabha there is reservation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Here also census figures are taken into account.

Q 4. On what basis is this reservation made?
Ans. Allocation of seats for Scheduled Castes and Tribes in the Lok Sabha are made on the basis of proportion of Scheduled Castes and Tribes in the State concerned to that of the total population, vide provision contained in Article 330 of the Constitution of India read with Section 3 of the R. P. Act, 1950.

Q 5. How many seats are reserved for Scheduled Castes in Lok Sabha?
Ans. 84 For Scheduled Castes, 84 seats are reserved in Lok Sabha. The 1st schedule to Representation of People Act, 1950 as amended vide Representation of People (Amendment) Act , 2008 gives the Statewise breakup.

Q 6. How many seats are reserved for Scheduled Tribes in Lok Sabha?
Ans. 47 For Scheduled Tribes, 47 seats are reserved in Lok Sabha. The 1st schedule to R. P. Act, 1950 as amended vide Representation of People (Amendment) Act , 2008 gives the Statewise break up.

Q 7. Which are the States having the minimum number of seats in Lok Sabha?
Ans. The following States and Union Territories have one seat each in the Lok Sabha Mizoram,Nagaland,Sikkim,Andaman and Nicobar Islands,Chandigarh,Dadra and Nagar Haveli,Daman and Diu,Lakshadweep,Pondicherry

Q 8. How many States are there in India?
Ans. 29 There are 29 states in India viz. Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal and West Bengal.

Q 9. How many Union Territories are in India?
Ans. Seven There are 7 Union Territories in India. Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Chandigarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Daman and Diu, Delhi, Lakshadweep and Pondicherry.

Q 10. For every State, there has to be a Legislative Assembly, but it is not so in the case of all Union Territories. Which are the U.Ts. having a Legislative Assembly?
Ans. Two Out of the 7 Union Territories, only Delhi and Pondicherry have Legislative Assemblies.

Q 1. What is the composition of Parliament of India?
Ans. According to Article 79 of the Constitution of India, the Parliament consists of President of India and the two Houses of Parliament known as Council of States (Rajya Sabha) and House of the People (Lok Sabha).

Q 2. Who elects the President of India?
Ans. The President is elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the elected members of both the Houses of Parliament and the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of States and the Union Territories of Delhi and Pondicherry.

Q 3. What is the manner of election of President?
Ans. According to Article 55 of the Constitution, as for as practicable, there has to be uniformity in the scale of representation of the different states at the election of the President. For the purpose of securing such uniformity among the States, the number of votes to which each State is entitled is determined as follows:- (a) every elected member of the legislative assembly of a State shall have as many votes as there are multiples of one thousand in the quotient obtained by dividing the population of the state by the total number of elected members of the Assembly; (b) If after taking the said multiples of one thousand, the remainder is not less than five hundred, then the vote of each member shall be further increased by one; (c) each elected member of either House of Parliament shall have such number of votes as may be obtained by dividing the total number of votes assigned to the members of the State Legislation Assemblies by the total number of elected members of both the House of Parliament fractions exceeding one-half being counted as one and & other fractions being disregarded.The election of the President shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote and the voting shall be by secret ballot.

Q 4.What is the term of office of President?
Ans. The President shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office.

Q 5. Will there be any situation in which the President demits office before the five year term?
Ans. Yes There will be two such situations. The first is when the President resigns his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Vice-President and the second when the President is removed from office by impeachment for violation of the constitution.

Q 6. What is the procedure for impeachment of the President?
Ans. According to Article 61 of the Constitution, when a President is to be impeached for violation of the Constitution, the charge shall be preferred by either House of Parliament. No such change shall be preferred unless (a) the proposal to prefer such change is contained in a resolution which has been moved after at least fourteen days' notice in writing signed by not less than one-fourth of the total number of members of the House has been given of their intention to move the resolution, and (b) such resolution has been passed by a majority of not less than two-third of the total membership of the House.

Q 7. Is the President eligible for election for a second term?
Ans. Yes According to Article 57 of the Constitution, a President is eligible for re-election to that office.

Q 8. What are the qualifications for election as President?
Ans. According to Article 58 of the Constitution, no person shall be eligible for election as President unless he is a citizen of India, has completed the age of thirty-five years and is qualified for election as a member of the House of the People. A person shall not be eligible if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Government.

Q 9. Can a Member of Parliament or the State Legislature become the President?
Ans. The President shall nor be a member of either House of Parliament or of a House of the Legislature of any state and if any such member is elected President he shall be claimed to have vacated his seat in that House on the date on which he enters upon office as President.

Q 10. Who elects the Vice-President of India?
Ans. The Vice-President is elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both House of Parliament.

Q 1. Which authority conducts elections to the offices of the President and Vice-President of India ?
Ans. Election Commission of India (ECI) Under Article 324(1) of the Constitution of India, the Election Commission of India, interalia, is vested with the power of superintendence, direction and control of conducting the elections to the offices of the President and Vice-President of India. Detailed provisions are made under the Presidential and Vice Presidential Elections Act, 1952 and the rules made thereunder.

Q 2. Which authority conducts elections to Parliament?
Ans. Election Commission of India (ECI) The same Article 324 also vests in the Commission the powers of superintendence, direction and control of the elections to both Houses of Parliament. Detailed provisions are made under the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and the rules made thereunder.

Q 3. Which authority conducts elections to the State Legislative Assemblies and Legislative Councils?
Ans. Election Commission of India (ECI) Article 324 (1) also vests in the Commission the powers of superintendence, direction and control of the elections to both Houses of the State Legislature. Detailed provisions are made under the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and the rules made thereunder.

Q 4. Which authority conducts elections to Corporations, Municipalities and other Local Bodies ?
Ans. The State Election Commissions (SECs) The State Election Commissions constituted under the Constitution (Seventy-third and Seventy-fourth) Amendments Act, 1992 for each State / Union Territory are vested with the powers of conduct of elections to the Corporations, Muncipalities, Zilla Parishads, District Panchayats, Panchayat Samitis, Gram Panchayats and other local bodies. They are independent of the Election Commission of India.

Q 5. What is the present composition of the Election Commission?
Ans. A Three - Member Body At present, the Election Commission of India is a three-member body, with one Chief Election Commissioner and two Election Commissioners.

Q 6. Has the Election Commission been a multi-member body from the beginning?
Ans. No. It was not a multi member body from the beginning. It was a single - member body when it was first set up in 1950 and up to 15th October, 1989 with only the Chief Election Commissioner. From 16th October, 1989 upto the 1st January, 1990, it became a three-member body with R.V.S.Peri Sastri (C.E.C) and S.S.Dhanoa and V.S.Seigell as Election Commissioners. From 2nd January, 1990 to 30th September, 1993, it was a single-member Commission and again from 1st October, 1993 it has become a three-member Commission.

Q 7. What is the status Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners in terms of salaries and allowances etc.?
Ans. Equivalent to Supreme Court Judges. The Chief Election Commissioner and the two Election Commissioners draw salaries and allowances at par with those of the Judges of the Supreme Court of India as provided for by the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Rules, 1992.

Q 8. What is the term of office of the Chief Election Commissioner? Is it different from the Election Commissioners?
Ans. The Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner holds office for a term of six years from the date on which he assumes his office. However, where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner attains the age of sixty-five years before the expiry of the said term of six years, he shall vacate his office on the the date on which he attains sixty-five years of age.

Q 9. When the Commissioner becomes a multi-member Commission, how are the decisions taken, whether by majority or by consensus?
Ans. Section 10 of the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service) Amendment Act, 1993 is reproduced below:- (1) The Election Commission may be by unanimous decision, regulate the procedure for transaction of to business as also allocation of its business amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and their Election Commissioners. (2) Save as provided in sub section (i) all business of the Election Commission shall, as far as possible, be transacted unanimously. (3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (ii), if the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners differ in opinion on any matter, such matter shall be decided by according to the opinion of the majority.

Q 10. Who appoints the Chief Election Commissioners and Election Commissioners?
Ans. The President. Under Article 324(2) of the Constitution of India, the President of India is empowered to appoint the Chief Election Commissioner and the Election Commissioners.

Ques. 1. Can a proposer of any candidate be also a candidate for the same constituency?
Ans. Yes, as per law there is no bar.

Ques. 2. If information given by a candidate in affidavit is wrong, can RO reject the nomination of the candidate? Especially, if other candidates raise objection and give proof that information in affidavit is wrong.
Ans. No, the nomination of a candidate cannot be rejected for suppressing or giving false information in the affidavit. The copies of the nomination papers filed by each candidate along with copy of the affidavit accompanying the nomination should be displayed on the notice board in the office of RO on the day the nomination is filed. If anyone furnishes any information contradicting the statements in the nomination form or affidavits by means of a duly sworn affidavit, copies of such affidavits should also be displayed on the notice board. If the RO is satisfied that the information given by the candidate in the affidavit is wrong he is required to file a formal complaint before the appropriate Court under section 125A of the R.P. Act, 1951 and Section 177 of IPC (read with section 200 CrPC).

Ques. 3. If a complaint is received that a person who has filed nomination is of unsound mind, what course of action will be taken by RO?
Ans. The complainant has to prove by producing a declaration by the competent court under the Lunacy Act to the affect that the person concerned is of unsound mind. Disqualification is attracted only when there is a declaration by competent court.

Ques. 4. What if 5 or more than 5 persons, who are proposers, happen to be illiterate & their thumb impressions are to be attested, can we allow more than 5 persons in the RO room in that case?
Ans. Thumb impressions on the nomination paper has to be attested for which thumb impressions have to be put before the RO or before an Administrative Officer not below the rank of SDO. To enable the proposers to put their thumb impressions before RO, they shall be called by the RO in batches of four for putting the thumb impression in his presence.

Ques. 5. Should the affidavits in Form 26, be in both English & Gujarati or in any one language?
Ans. It has to be given either in English or in one local language of the state which is the official language and in case of Gujarat it can be in Gujarati.

Ques. 6. If the affidavit of a candidate is objected to, and RO feels that it has some substance, does the RO himself initiate proceedings under RP Act or IPC or should objector do it?
Ans. Yes, the RO has to initiate proceeding under the relevant statutory provisions. (Pl. see Ans. To Q. No. 2)

Ques. 7. For an independent candidate 10 proposers are required to sign the nomination paper before RO. If during scrutiny one proposer says it was not signed by him, what will RO do?
Ans. The RO shall ask the person concerned to submit an affidavit to this affect. If affidavit is submitted then RO shall make a summary inquiry to satisfy himself as to the authenticity of the signature of the proposer. The candidate shall be given adequatae opportunity to present his case. In case it is proved that the signature was forged, the nomination of the candidate will be rejected since the nomination with 9 proposers cannot be accepted as a valid nomination paper as per law in the case of candidates sponsored by registered unrecognized party and independent candidates.

Ques. 8. Whether nomination papers of a candidate who was physically present just a minute before 3:00 PM on the last day of nomination, but without documents will be received or not?
Ans. Nomination paper if available with the candidate has to be received but no other document shall be permitted to be brought into his office after 3.00 PM. In the check list, the fact of not having submitted the relevant documents will be entered. Question of rejection of nomination paper will be decided at he time of scrutiny.

Ques. 9. What is the time limit for filing Form 6, to include name in electoral rolls in case applicant wants to be candidate also.
Ans. Minimum 10 (Ten) days before the last date of making the nomination for an election. However, Form-6 filed thereafter upto the last date for filing nomination shall be received by the ERO but orders can be passed on each such Form only after completion of the election. Under the law, no order for inclusion of name in electoral roll can be made after the last date for making nomination. There are Court ruling clarifying that the cut-off time for passing orders in this regard would be 3.00 PM on the last day of filing of nomination. There are other statutory requirement of displaying the applications on the notice board by the ERO for 7 days, etc. before the ERO can pass orders on the claim application.

Ques. 10. What document should be taken as proof of citizenship?
Ans. There is no specific document to prove the citizenship. For contesting elections from a state Legislative Assembly Constituency, the intending candidate should be enrolled in the electoral roll of any assembly constituency in that state. The presumption in normal course would be that such person is a citizen. In case somebody challenges the citizenship of a candidate, the onus is on the objector to produce sufficient proof before the RO in this regard. If this onus is discharged by the objector, the RO should prima-facie give an opportunity to the intending candidate to rebut the complaint. Generally, MHA issues such certificate of canceling citizenship.

Q.1 Who elects the President of India?
Answer: The President is elected by an Electoral College, which consists of the elected members of both Houses of Parliament and the elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of all the States and also of NCT of Delhi and the Union Territory of Puducherry. [Article 54 of the Constitution of India]

Q.2 What is the term of the office of the President?
Answer: The President shall hold office for a term of 5 years from the date on which he enters upon his office. He shall, however, continue to hold office notwithstanding the expiry of his term, until his successor enters upon his office. [Article 56 of the Constitution of India]

Q.3 When is the election of the Office of President of India held?
Answer: Under the provisions of sub-section (3) of Section 4 of the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 1952, the notification calling the election to the office of the President can be issued by the Election Commission on any day within the period of sixty days before the expiry of the term of office of the outgoing President. The election schedule shall be so fixed, that the President-elect is able to enter upon his office on the day following the expiry of the term of the outgoing President.

Q.4 Who conducts the election to the Office of President of India?
Answer: Under Article 324 of the Constitution of India, the authority to conduct elections to the Office of President is vested in the Election Commission of India.

Q.5 What electoral system/process is followed for the election to the office of the President?
Answer: As per Article 55(3) of the Constitution of India, the election of the President shall be held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of single transferable vote and the voting at such election shall be by secret ballot.

Q.6 What are the Qualifications required by a candidate to contest the election to the Office of the President of India?
Answer: Under Article 58, a candidate should fulfill the following eligibility conditions to contest the election to the Office of President: - 1. Must be a citizen of India, 2. Must have completed 35 years of age, 3. Must be eligible to be a member of the Lok Sabha, 4. Should not be holding any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any State or under any local or other authority subject to the control of any of the said Governments. However, the candidate may be holding the office of President or Vice-President or Governor of any State or Ministers of the Union or any State and shall be eligible to contest election.

Q.7 Apart from the above what are the conditions to be fulfilled by a candidate for his nomination to be valid?
Answer: A nomination paper of a candidate for the election has to be made in the prescribed form (Form 2 appended to the Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Rules, 1974) and it has to be subscribed by at least fifty electors as proposers and at least fifty electors as seconders. The nomination paper duly completed in all respects has to be presented to the Returning Officer, between 11AM and 3PM on any day other than on a public holiday appointed for the purpose by the Election Commission, either by the candidate himself or by any of his proposers or seconders. Here ǲElectorsǳ mean elected MPs and elected MLAs who are electors for Presidential Election.The Security Deposit for the election, of Rs.15000/- should also be deposited either in cash with the Returning Officer or a receipt showing that the amount has been deposited by the candidate or on his behalf in the Reserve Bank of India or in a Government Treasury should be furnished along with the nomination paper.The candidate is also required to furnish a certified copy of the entry showing his name in the current electoral roll for the Parliamentary Constituency in which the candidate is registered as an elector. [see Sections 5B and 5C of the President and Vice-President Elections Act, 1952]

Q.8 Who is appointed the Returning Officer/Assistant Returning Officer for the election to the Office of President of India? Who makes such appointment?
Answer: By convention, the Secretary General, Lok Sabha or the Secretary General, Rajya Sabha is appointed as the Returning Officer, by rotation. Two other senior officers of the Lok Sabha/ Rajya Sabha Secretariat and the Secretaries and one more senior officer of Legislative Assemblies of all States including NCT of Delhi and Union Territory of Puducherry, are also appointed as the Assistant Returning Officers. The Election Commission of India makes such appointments.[For the Presidential Election, 2017 the Secretary General Lok Sabha is the Returning Officer]

Q.9 Can a Candidate submit more than one nomination paper? What would be the security deposit to be made by such candidate?
Answer: Yes. A candidate can file a maximum of four nomination papers. However, he is required to make only one security deposit in this regard. [see Section 5B (6) and 5C of the President and Vice-President Elections Act, 1952]

Q.10 Can an elector propose or second the nomination of more than one candidate at a Presidential election?
Answer: No. An elector can propose or second the name of only one candidate at a Presidential election. If he subscribes as proposer or seconder, the nomination papers of more than one candidate, his signature shall be deemed operative only on the nomination paper first delivered to the Returning Officer. [see Section 5B(5) of the President and Vice-President Elections Act, 1952]

1) What can be the maximum number of members of Rajya Sabha?
Ans. 250 The maximum number of members of Rajya Sabha can be 250. Article 80 of the Constitution of India provides that 12 members are to be nominated by the President of India and not more than 238 representatives from the States to be elected by the elected members of the State Legislative Assemblies in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote. (Article 80 of the Constitution).

2) What is the present strength of Rajya Sabha?
Ans. 245 Members. 12 are nominated and 233 are elected.

3) What is the life of Rajya Sabha?
Ans.Rajya Sabha is a Permanent House and is not subject to dissolution as per Article 83(1) of the Constitution of India. But as nearly as possible, one third of its members shall retire every 2nd year and an equal number of members are chosen to replace them.

4) Who elects the members of the Rajya Sabha?
Ans.Elected members of the State Legislative Assemblies. Here the word ‘State’ includes Puducherry and National Capital Territory of Delhi also.Article 80(4) of Constitution of India provides that members of Rajya Sabha shall be elected by the elected members of State Legislative Assemblies through the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote.

5) Who nominates the members of the Rajya Sabha?
Ans. President of India The President of India nominates 12 members of Rajya Sabha as mentioned earlier.

6). Is there any special qualification for nominated members?
Ans. Yes Article 80 (3) of the Constitution of India provides that the members to be nominated by the President to Rajya Sabha should have special knowledge or practical experience in matters like literature, science, art and social service. Article 84 (b) stipulates that a person shall be of not less than 30 (Thirty) years of age.

7). How many no. of Proposers are required to subscribe a Nomination in election to Council of States?
Ans: - In the case of candidates set up by recognized parties, each nomination of a candidate for election to the Council of States or State Legislative Council shall be subscribed by at least ten per cent of the elected members of the Legislative Assembly concerned or ten members, whichever is less, as proposers. In case of other candidates, by ten elected members of the Legislative Assembly.

8). How many sets of nomination paper a candidate can file?
Ans: - Four Under sub-section (6) of section 33 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, read with sub-section (2) g Section 39, a maximum of four nomination papers only, can be presented by or on behalf of any candidate or accepted for election in the same Constituency.

9). Who can present the nomination paper to the Returning Officer?
Ans:- Nomination paper to be presented either by candidate or by any of his proposers.

10). What is the amount of security deposit for contesting Rajya Sabha election?
Ans:Every candidate at an election to the Council of States or a State Legislative Council is required to make a deposit of Rs. 10,000/- (Section 34 read with section 39 (2) of the Representation of the People Act, 1951) as amended by the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 2009 (come into force from 1st February, 2010). The amount of deposit shall be Rs. 5,000/- only, if he/she is a member of a Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes.
